waterfall methods:
    Before Devops organization were using this particular model software development methodology.
    Waterfall methodology is a widely used project management method with a linear approach from beginning
    to end of a project.
    It contains five phases:
            Requirement and Gathering Analysis -> Design -> Development -> test -> Deploy -> Maintenance

Agile methodology:
    In Agile methodology each project is broken up into serveral "Iteration".
    All the iteration should be of the same time duration(between 2 to 8 weeks).
    At the end of each iteration, a working product should be delivered.

    Analyze -> plan -> ( Design -> Build -> Test) -> Deploy
                                (iteration)


What is Devops?
    Devops combines development(dev) and operation(ops) to increase the efficiency,speed, and security of
    software development and delivery compared to traditional process.

Devops phases :
    The Devops culture is implemented in several phases with help of several tools

                            *Plan
                            *code (Tools - git)
                            *Build (Tools - Maven and gradel)
                            *Test (Tools - selenium)
                            *Deploy (Puppet)
                            *Operation (Ansible, Docker , Kubernates)
                            *Monitor (Nagios)
                            *Integrate (Jenkins)

what is CI/CD pipeline:
    A CI/CD pipeline helps you to automate steps in your software delivery process, such as initiating
    code builds, running automated tests, deploying to a staging or product environment.

Devops Stages:
        stage 1 --->  Version control(SCM --> Source code management)
        stage 2 --->  Continuous Integration
        stage 3 --->  Continuous delivery
        stage 4 --->  Continuous deployment

stage 1 --->  Version control(SCM --> Source code management)
        Maintains different version of the code.
            eg: so there are multiple developer write code for particular application, so how 
                will I know which developer made which commit and what time and which commit is causing
                error, how will I revert back to the pervious commit and How will I manages the sourse
                code (Tool is git)

                SCM has to types
                    1 . Centralized version control System
                    2 . Distributed version control system (GIT)

                GIT:
                    Git is a distributed version control system that tracks changes in any set 
                    of computer files, usually used for coordinating work among programmers who 
                    are collaboratively developing source code during software development.

stage 2 ---> CI - Continuous Integration (continuous Build)
        Continuous Integration means building application continuously.
        CI is a fundamental practice that involves merging code changes into a central repository
        several times a day.
            eg: Any developers Made a changes in source code a continuous integration server(Jenkins server)
                should pull that code and prepare to build means all(compile, validate, code review,
                Unit Testing, Integration testing etc)

        The tool which is used for Continuous Integration is Jenkins.

        What is Jenkins?
            Jenkins is an open source automation tool written is java with plugins built for continuous 
               integration purpose. Plugins allows integration of various Devops stages.

               plugin categorization:
                        * Test (Junit,..)
                        * Reports (HTML publisher)
                        * Notifications (Jenkins build Notifications plugin)
                        * Deployment (Deploy plugin)
                        * compile (maven)

                Jenkins Distributed Architecture:
                       *  Jenkins Master will distribute its workload to the slaves.
                       *  Jenkins Slaves are generally required to provide the desired environment.
                                It works on the basic of request recevied from jenkins Master.
    
stage 3 --->  CD - Continuous delivery (Continuous Test)
        Deploying the build application to test server performing UAT(user Acceptance testing) or (End User Testing)

stage 4 ---> CD - Continuous Deployment 
        Deploying the tested application on the production server for release.

stage 5 --->
        All the 4 stage will be Monitored(Continuous Monitoring) Tools link (Nagios)
    
    CI/CD stands for continuous integration and continuous delivery/deployment, and is a 
    set of DevOps practices that aims to speed up the software development lifecycle. CI 
    is a fundamental practice that involves merging code changes into a central repository, 
    and CD can mean either continuous delivery or continuous deployment. CI/CD pipelines 
    automate the process of delivering code changes from developers' desktops to production.


configuration management:(CM)  ---> Deploy
    configuration Management is the pratice of handling changes Systematically so that 
    so that a system maintains its integrity over time.
    Configuration management(CM) ensures that the current design and build state of the
    system is known as good & trusted.

        If your updating a software you keep record of what all things you have updated.
           
           ***And we achive configuration management by (infrastructure as Code (IAC))

        infrastructure as Code (IAC)
                    it's about setting up and managing your computer systems, servers, networks, 
                    and other infrastructure components using code.

            eg: lets talk about the few issue with the deployment of particular application
                when I build the application when I Deployed to the test server ,there some 
                dpendencies issue because of my application is not working fine.
                developer has updated version but production is using older version so my 
                application is not working fine.

                important point:*****
                    It helps us to revert to a pervious version of the component if you have replaced
                    with a new but flawed version.

            There are two types of Congiguration Management approaches:
                    * push
                    * pull

            Configuration management Tools:
                Ansible and saltstack are push based configuration management.push all the things
                node directly.

                puppet and chef are the pull based configuration management from the central 
                server.



            various tools ---> puppet
                    puppet it a configuration management tool that is used for Deploying configuring
                    and managing servers.
                        eg: bigbillion day 

                    it follows master-slaves Architecture 
                            slaves will pull the central server for changes made in the configuration.

                            puppet slaves sends the facts to puppet masters basically key value data pairs


Containerization : (operation)
        Containers are the lightweight alternative to virtual machines.It a container which contains
        my application.

        we have docker containers that will contains the binaries and libraries required to particular
        application.with docker Engine and HostOS(only).

        docker files(microservices) -> I create docker Image (we can create as many as docker container) ->
            Docker image which I can upload to Docker Hub which is git repository of Docker Images ->
                any team can pull as many as containers for staging server and production server.

            Few Basic Docker command:
                    to get all the image having in local system ->  docker images

                    To pull a image eg: ubuntu image -> docker pull ubuntu

                    To run a container -> docker run -it ubuntu

Continuous Monitoring :(Tools -> nagios)
        Continuous Monitoring is all about ability of organization to detect, report the attacks that 
        occurs in its infrastructure.

        Continuous Monitoring tools resolve any system errors (error like low memory,unreachable servers etc)

        
What is version control system:
        A version control system (VCS) is a software tool that tracks changes to files over time. VCSs are 
        also known as SCM (Source Code Management) tools.

what is git?
    Git is a free and open-source version control system,Git is distributed: every developer has the full 
    history of their code repository locally.

what is GITHUB:
    GitHub is an online software development platform. It's used for storing, tracking, and collaborating 
    on software projects. It makes it easy for developers to share code files and collaborate with fellow 
    developers on open-source projects.

Docker:

Problems before Docker:
    1.  An Application works on developers laptop but not in testing or production. This is due to 
        difference in computing environment between DEV, Test and production. 

    2. The idea behind microservices is that some types of application become easier to build and 
        maintain when they broken into smaller, Composabel pieces which work together.Each services
        Developed separately.

How Docker solves these problem:
        you can run several microservices in the same VM by running various Docker containers for
        each microservices.

        so, we have Host Machine on that top we have virtual machine on that top of virtual machines
        we have multiple docker containers with dependencies.

what is Docker:
        Docker is a tool designed to make it easier to create, deploy, and run application by using 
        containers.
        Docker containers are lightweight alternative to Virtual machines and it uses the host Os.
        You don't have to pre-allocate any RAM in containers.

Docker work flow:
        (Docker File) builds a Docker image -> that image contains all project codes -> You can run that
         images to create as many Docker container on Virtual machine -> Then Images uplaoded on Docker Hub
         from Docker hub any one can pull the image and build a containers.

Dockers components:
        1. Docker registry:
              * Docker Registry is a storage component for Docker Images.
              * we can store the images in either public/private repository.
              * Docker HUB is Docker very own cloud repository.
            

Kubernetes:
        Kubernetes is an open sources container Management tool which automates container deployment,
        containers scaling and container load balancing.

Introduction to Ansible:
        Ansible is a configuration management, Deployment tool, is push based configuration management
        tool.
        It automates your entire IT infrastructure by providing large productivity gains.

workflow of Ansible:
    
    eg: lets say I am using version control system(git) and I am also using Jenkins for Continuous
        Integration now Jenkins will extract code from get every time there is is new commit
        and making software built and later, this build will get Deployed in the test server for
        testing Now if the changes are kept making in the code base continuously you would have to
        configure your test and product server continuously will changes according. So what 
        Ansible does that it continuously keep checking the version control system(git) here 
        so it can configure the test and production server accordingly and quick. And it 
        makes your application deployment very easy.

Puppet:
        Puppet is a Configuration management tool that is used for Deploying, Configuring and 
        Managing servers.

            Its uses a Master- slave Architecture

            configuration are pulled from the master by the Nodes.

what is continuous Monitoring?
        Continuous Monitoring is basically an effective system where the entine IT Infrastructure
        starting from your application to your business process to your server is monitored in 
        an ongoing way and in an automated fashion.

What is Nagios?
        Nagios is a Continuous Monitoring Tool and your entire infrastructure to ensure System,
        applications, services, and business process are functioning properly.

why we need continuous Monitoring:
        1 . failure of CI/CD pipelines
        2 . Infrastructure issue
        3 . Application issue
        4 . Static code Analysis

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Devsecops:

Importance of security:
    Security is important at all the levels of SDLC.
    Challenges of implementing Security:
        There are two biggest Challenges that companies have,
            1 . Focus on fast development of new features
            2 . Application Systems become more complex
                        eg: we have a large containerized microservices applications that running in Kubernates
                            Clusters on cloud platform using tons of different aws services with data
                            persistence in ten different types of databases , you may have like a primary 
                            database, SQL database NoSQL Database, a caching or memory databaseand so on,
                            and tens of external services that your applications taking to(APIs).
                            Addtionaly we have a Streamlined CI/CD pipelines that deploys to Clusters. 

what is Devsecops:
    Devsecops stands for development, security, operations. Its a practice that automates the integration 
    of Security at all the stage of software development lifecycle.

SAST(Static Application Security Testing)
    It a software testing technique that scan an application source code, byte or binaries to identify 
    security velnerabities. SAST is also known as static code Analysis or white box testing.
        SAST scans an application before the code is complied. It helps developers find and fix 
    issue early in the development process.SAST identifies the root cause of velnerabities and help 
    remediate the underlying security flaws.

SCA (Software Composition Analysis)
    SCA is automated process that identifies open source software codebase.It a review of the open 
    source components, dependencies, and license requirements embedded in software supply chain.If 
    it is found any issue in code it will notify.

DAST(Dynamic Application security Testing)
    It is Non Functional testing process that helps to identify security velnerabities in application.
    DAST scans running application to identity vulnerabilities such as,
            *input/output validation issue
            *configuration mistakes
            *errors
            *SQL injections
            *Cross site scripting

What is Cluster :
    Cluster is a group of virtual machine(VI) that works together to perform a task. 

The Tool which is used for security:
     SonarQube
            
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
what is data?
    Data refers to raw facts, figures, observations, or information that can be collected, 
    stored, and processed. It can take various forms, including numbers, text, images, 
    audio, video, and more. Data can be structured, such as in databases where it's 
    organized into tables with defined relationships, or unstructured, such as in text 
    documents or multimedia files.

There are two types of software :
    * Application software 
    * System software

Application software:
    Collection of programs is called Application software.

System software:
    System software = Operating System

Operating System:
    Interface between user and machine(computer hardware).
    Resources manager of a computer.
    It will manage the processes, memory and files.
    An operating system (OS) is a system software that connects a computer user with the
     computer's hardware. It is the main system software that allows a device to run.
    The software that contains the core components of the operating system is called the
    Kernal.

Kernal:
    The kernel is a core component of an operating system and serves as the main interface
    between the computer's hardware and OS. The kernel enables multiple applications to 
    share hardware resources by providing access to CPU, memory, disk I/O, and networking.

Different types of OS:
    *Linux
    *Microsoft Windows
    *Apple Mac OS

types of OS:
    Client OS 
    Server OS 

Client OS:
    A client operating system (OS) is a simple operating system that runs on various client
    devices, such as computers, laptops, smartphones, and tablets. It is different from
    centralized servers because it only supports one user. Client OS manages local resources, 
    including files, printers, and peripheral devices. It is used to access services 
    provided by servers, such as Windows, Android, Firefox, Symbian, and macOS.

Server OS:
    Imagine you have a small business and you want to set up a server to store all your files,
    manage emails, host a website, and run some custom business applications. You'd need a server
    operating system to handle all these tasks efficiently.
    One popular example of a server operating system is Microsoft Windows Server. 
    It's designed specifically for servers and comes with features tailored for managing 
    networks, storing data, hosting websites, running applications, and more. With Windows Server,
    you can set up user accounts, manage permissions, configure security settings, and ensure that 
    your business operations run smoothly.
    So, in this scenario, Windows Server would be the server operating system you'd install on your 
    server computer to manage all your business needs effectively.

Types of services:
    client = Service receiver
    server = service provider

How server is controlling client computer?
    * Server computers and client computers are connected in "Network".
    * we need to configure server computer configuration in client computer.
    * client request will handle by the server and it will respond to the client.
    
How data transfer between two computers?
    Application > Data > NIC(Network Interface card) > Packet > transfer in cable(RJ45) > Packet > NIC > Data > Application

IP Address:
    An IP address, or Internet Protocol address, is a unique number that identifies a 
    device connected to the internet or a local network. IP addresses contain location 
    information and allow devices to communicate with each other. The internet needs IP 
    addresses to differentiate between different devices, such as computers, routers, and websites.

Subnetting:
    In networking it means taking a large group of IP addresses and splitting them into
    smaller groups called subnets.This helps manage and organize devices on a Network
    more efficiently, allowing different parts of the networks to be treated separately
    while still being connected.

Benefits of Subnetting:
    *security
    *Performance
    *Simplified Network management
    *Easy to solve network issue

Public Network:
    A public network can be accessed by anyone at any time, like the internet.

Private Network:
    Private networks, on the other hand, restrict access to the general public 
    and are typically used to connect private entities such as corporations or schools.

Virtual networks:
    A virtual network is a network that uses software and wireless technology to connect 
    devices, servers, virtual machines, and data centers.

Virtual  private network:
    A Virtual private network or vpn is like a secret tunnel on the internet.
    when you use it your online activites become private and secure.



 


